Introduction to Quantum Computers Objectives & Prerequisites • After this workshop, you should
be • Familiar with basics and general trends of quantum computers • Able to understand simple
quantum circuits • Ready to build and run simple quantum computing tasks with QISKit • We
assume that you know • Basic knowledge of linear algebra and statistics, but not mandatory • No
prior knowledge of quantum mechanics required • Recommendation: An account @ IBM Quantum
Experience https://quantum-computing.ibm.com 2 A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO QUANTUM
COMPUTING | Shohini Ghose https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QuR969uMICM Agenda •
What is a Quantum Computer? • Brief history, quantum mechanics, current status • Basic Concepts
of Quantum Computers • Qubit, superposition, entanglement, decoherence, measurement •
Quantum gates, quantum circuits, quantum algorithm • How does a Quantum Computer work? •
Requirements of quantum computer • Quantum computer design & roadmap • Applications of
Quantum Computers • Quantum optimization • Quantum chemistry and materials • Quantum
communication • Case studies: cryptography, Shor algorithm, variational quantum eigensolver •
DEMO: Quantum Computing with QISKit 4 About Myself • Ph.D. degree, quantum chemist by
training, UNC-CH Chemistry • Senior Computational Scientist @ Research Computing Center,
UNC-CH • Engagement group, training, collaboration, etc. • Research Interests: Development of
density functional theory and its applications in biology, energy and drug design (using HPC/HTC
clusters) 5 https://shubin.web.unc.edu/ “There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom” (1959) “When we
get to the very, very small world – say circuits of seven atoms – we have a lot of new things that
would happen that represent completely new opportunities for design. Atoms on a small scale
behave like nothing on a large scale, for they satisfy the laws of quantum mechanics…” Richard
Feynman Moore’s law & Future of Computers 2025 2040 atom-sized molecular-sized transistors
transistors Moore, G. E. Electronics 8, 114– 117 (1965). Image from: Ferain, I. et al., Nature 479,
310–316 (2011). Silicon Source Drain Gate Insulator i386 1986 Moore’s law will soon run into
major physical constraints! Moore's law is the observation that the number of transistors in a dense
integrated circuit doubles about every two years. 6 What is a quantum computer? ➢Quantum
Computer ➢A computer that uses laws of quantum mechanics to perform massively parallel
computing through superposition, entanglement, and decoherence. ➢Classical Computer ➢A
computer that uses voltages flowing through circuits and gates, which can be controlled and
manipulated entirely by classical mechanics. 7 Evolution of Quantum Theory & Quantum
Technology 8 The Foundations From Theory to Practice Commercialization & Application 1980
2010 1900’s 2021 1925: Schrödinger Equation proposed 2020: Chinese scientists claimed 100
trillion faster of quantum supremacy Brief History of Quantum Computers • 1981: Richard
Feynman proposed to use quantum computing to model quantum systems. He also describe
theoretical model of quantum computer • 1985: David Deutsch described first universal quantum
computer • 1994: Peter Shor developed the first algorithm for quantum computer (factorization into
primes) • 1995 Schumacher proposed “Quantum bit” or “qubit” as physical resource • 1996: Lov
Grover developed an algorithm for search in unsorted database • 1998: the first quantum computers
on two qubits, based on NMR (Oxford; IBM, MIT, Stanford) • 2000: quantum computer on 7
qubits, based on NMR (Los-Alamos) • 2001: 15 = 3 x 5 on 7- qubit quantum computer by IBM •
2005-2006: experiments with photons; quantum dots; fullerenes and nanotubes as "particle traps" 9
Brief History of Quantum Computers • 2007: D-Wave announced the creation of a quantum
computer on 16 qubits • 2012: D-Wave claimed a quantum computation using 84 qubits • 2017: D-
Wave Systems Inc. announced the D-Wave 2000Q quantum annealer with 2000 qubits • 2017:
Microsoft revealed Q Sharp with 32 qubits • 2018: Google announced the creation of a 72-qubit
quantum chip • 2019: Google claimed quantum supremacy with 54 qubits to perform operations in
200 seconds that would take a supercomputer about 10,000 years to complete • 2019: IBM revealed
53 qubits • 2020: Chinese researchers claimed to have achieved quantum supremacy using a
photonic 76- qubit system at 100 trillion times the speed of classical supercomputers • 2020: IBM
will build 1121-qubit quantum computer in 2023, and 1 million-qubit quantum computer in 2030.
10 Quantum Mechanics Quantum mechanics is the theory that describes the behavior of
microscopic systems, such as photons, electrons, atoms, molecules, etc. Nobody understandsquantum mechanics! “No, you’re not going to be able to understand it.... You see, my physics
students don’t understand it either. That is because I don’t understand it. Nobody does. ... The
theory of quantum electrodynamics describes Nature as absurd from the point of view of common
sense. And it agrees fully with an experiment. So I hope that you can accept Nature as She is –
absurd” --Richard Feynman 11 Classical vs. Quantum Mechanics Classical Mechanics • It deals
with macroscopic particles • It is based on Newton’s laws of motion and Maxwell’s electromagnetic
wave theory • Any amount of energy may be emitted or absorbed continuously • The state of a
system is defined exactly by specifying their positions and velocities • The future state can be
predicted with certainty Quantum Mechanics • It deals with microscopic particles • It is based on
the Schrödinger equation • In Planck’s postulation, only discrete values of energy are emitted or
absorbed – origin of “quantum” • Because of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle and de Broglie
hypothesis dual nature of matter (both particle & wave), the state of a system cannot be specified
exactly • It gives probabilities of finding particles at various locations in space 12 Quantum
Mechanics • Quantum states, represented by Dirac’s ket, | >, evolve in time according to the
Schrödinger equation: • which implies that time evolution is described by unitary transformations: •
where |> is the quantum state (wavefunction) and H is Hamiltonian • This theory, which has been
extensively tested by experiments, is probabilistic in nature. The outcomes of measurements on
quantum systems are not deterministic. • Between measurements, quantum systems evolve
according to linear equations (the Schrödinger equation). This means that solutions to the equations
obey a superposition principle: linear combinations of solutions are still solutions.
